 PhoneCards  
1997-2001 

~ Everything you need to know  ~

Read / Write
Emulate a real ISO7816 memory card ...

 

Disclaimer
 
The information presented on this page is intended for personal use and improvement of knowledge only. I advice you not to try to get free phone calls on a real payphone. If you use what you learned on this page and got caught doing something illegal do not make me responsible. You have been warned.
 

 

  NEWS ! 

30 July 2001   Added My 2001 prototype PCB, scheme, beta HEX file and some photos.
 
15 July 2001   Added new source codes and a bunch of stuff found on the internet.
 
14 July 2001   Finally past 3 years I've decided to update this page !
I'm also currently redeveloping a new version of the PIC code. The changes are: units counter will automatically reset to 0 if empty; some bugs corrected, no longer EEPROM data is lost; fast startup for recent fast machines; now follows the exact protocol so there is no way to tell if it is a real phone card or a PIC talking and more things to come like a random card ID generator with valid CRC every time the card empties.
 
      
 

 

  FORUM  

    Have any doubt ? Have anything useful to say about the project ? - Then this is for you !
    Write in the forum in Portuguese or English.
 


 
 
 

  

Works in the follow countries
    French Polynesia, DisneyLand Paris, Djibouti, Senegal (Sonatel), French Cinecarte [TBC], Sweden, Argentina (Telefonica de Argentina), Norway (Telenor), New Caledonia, Cameroon, Andorra, Central African Republic (Socatel), Luxembourg, Ireland, Gambia, Guinean Equatorial Republic (Getesa), Portugal, Malta, Czech Republic / Yougoslavia, Comores, Argentina (Telecom Argentina), Burkina Faso, Mali, Gabon, Finland, Madagascar (Telecom Malagasy S.A.), Togo (OPT Togo), Slovakia, Cuba (Etecsa), Morocco (Special Operator), Israel (Bezeq), Guinea (Sotelgui), Emirates (Etisalat), Poland, Hungary, Cameroon (CamTel), Morocco (Ave Phone), Argentina (Special Cards).

    On this page I have made the thing to work for Portugal. If you wish to use on other country then you have to get the first 12 bytes from a valid card for your country, that's the ID data. You can see the card data with the payphone simulator. Write the new bytes on the source code, recompile and upload to the PIC.

    

  First of all  


What you need to know about electronics telecards (v2.04)
  

 

  The payphone simulator 

Hardware Software 

Schematics
  
Cartao 1.2
  
Cartao source code in turbo pascal
  

 

  My 2001 emulator 

Hardware PIC16F84 compiled HEX and schematics zip file 

Schematics
PCB layout

PCB to print
 
 Version 1.11beta PT-10
(Portuguese ID data with 10 units) 

 

  My 1997 emulator 

Hardware Code for PIC16F84 

Schematics
  
Latest version and historial HEX files for Portuguese Card
(source might not be available)
  

Compressed zip file with source and schematics
  

 

  Other emulators 

Hardware Code Brain Comments 
Schematics HEX + Source PIC16F84 Hex file and source code I discover on an argentine site, it's is indeed an improvement of phrack code like mine (same schematic), this one has a reset button and emulates 10 telecards IDs. Very good ! Just need to change the ID values for Portugal.
 
PCB on ZIP file HEX + Source + PCB PIC12C508 Hex file, source code and PCB layout. Small and fast but requires an external battery. Just need to change the ID values for Portugal.
 
Scheme on ZIP file Source + Scheme PIC12C509 Source code and scheme. Small but requires an external battery. Very bad commented source code. Just need to change the ID values for Portugal.
 
n/a HEX + Source PIC16F84 Hex file and source code from Italy.
 

 

  Telecards 

ISO 7816 Portuguese memory dumps
If you have memory dumps of real cards,  mail me them to add to the file 

Definitions
  
With detailed description
  
Others
  

 

  Resources 

Filename Comments Personal opinion
 
../OTHERS Misc files I don't have time to write a comment.   
Fotolito by Baby PCB layout of some wafer cards with PIC16x84 PDIP and SMD. Scheme doesn't work with my PIC program, just to give you ideas. 
itt Spanish text about Spanish telecards with time diagrams. Also applies to Portugal and others, can be useful. 
cTarjetas128bits Spanish text about the new 128 bits cards used there and 256 bits telecards with time diagrams. Could this be the next generation in Portugal ? 
Fotolitos PCB layout of some argentine wafer cards with PIC16x84 with anti fraud bypass for some payphone protections. Can be useful, see the list resistor values vs. Mhz PIC speed.  
LOG DUBBER V1.0 LOG grabber, interface your parallel port between a real telecard and a payphone and grab the communication. Very useful for debugging purposes. 
Visualizador LGD 1.0 LOG viewer, load a LGD file and see the graphical time diagram like in a memory oscilloscope. Very useful for debugging purposes. 
LogsLGD Logs files of some argentine payphones.
128bits read, 128bits write, vcc power up, reset sequence. Interesting but doesn't apply to Portugal. 
Loguer + Visualizador Visual Basic source code of a Logger and viewer, requires PORT32.OCX. Improve it and translate to English then send me your version. 
LOG DUBBER V1.0 LOG grabber, interface your parallel port between a real telecard and a payphone and grab the communication. Very useful to debugging purposes. 

 

  Programming PIC 16F84 

Programmer Getting Started PDF Documents 
Hardware Software 

Ludipipo serial programmer
  
NT PIC Programmer
  
Getting Started with the PIC 16c84
  
Data Sheet
  
EEPROM Programming
  

 

  2001 pre-prototype pictures 

Real card PCB 
  
PIC top side sanded to 0,8mm
Care was taken on the upper side not to reach and break the tiny connections to the legs from the chip brain in the center of the black case. PIC bottom side
It's on top of this piece of metal that lives the chip brain. Don't sand more when you get this aspect. 
  
Ower PIC after and before being run over by a truck 
 

 

  1997 prototype pictures 

Front view Rear view 
  
  
  

 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright © ?hav??ro
29/8/2001 22:07
 This page was last edited at 30 Julho 2001 

 
